.. _errors_and_warnings:

===================
Errors and Warnings
===================

Running a classification job can result in different errors or warnings. Some
of them are explained below. Please let us now if you run into an error or
warning that is not explained here (spice.webapp@gmail.com)

The provided errors and warnings are generated by the scikit-learn software,
that is used for classification. The scikit-learn_ website contains a lot of
useful information and documentation.

.. _scikit-learn: http://scikit-learn.org/stable/

------------------------------
Variable are collinear warning
------------------------------

Both the linear and quadratic discriminant analysis (LDA and QDA) classifiers
can result in a warning that there are collinear variables::

    UserWarning: Variables are collinear warnings.warn("Variables are
    collinear")

Both LDA and QDA involves computing a matrix inversion, which is inaccurate if
the determinant is close to 0, i.e. two or more variables are almost a linear
combination of each other. This multicollinearity_ might have a negative effect
on your classification results. However, this is not necessarily a problem,
since a good classification performance might still be obtain, for example when
running an LDA classifier on the *A. niger* example project using the amino
acid composition as features.

.. _multicollinearity: http://www.wikipedia.org/wiki/multicollinearity

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Sum of true positives and false positives are equal to zero for some labels
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

During a cross-validation loop, it might occur that a class label is not
assigned to any of the proteins in the test set. For example, in case of a
two-class classification problem with classes *class1* and *class2*, it could
happen that all proteins are predicted to be in *class1* and none to be in
*class2*, even though stratified cross-validation is used. This often happens
in case of class inbalance. If this is the case, then both the number of true
and false positives are zero (or both the number of true and false negatives),
which renders several scoring functions ill defined::

    UserWarning: The sum of true positives and false positives are equal to
    zero for some labels. Precision is ill defined for those labels [ 1.]. The
    precision and recall are equal to zero for some labels. fbeta_score is ill
    defined for those labels [ 1.]

These warnings might occur in multiple cross-validation (CV) loops, so multiple
of such warnings might occur for one classification run.



